Preview/maskinporten (#133)
nais/doc: security/auth/maskinporten.md

---
description: >

>   Enabling `server-2-server` authentication with external agencies using Maskinporten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Enabling service-to-service authentication with external agencies using Maskinporten.
```

---

# Maskinporten Client

{% hint style="warning" %}
**Status: Opt-In Open Beta**

This feature is only available in the [Google Cloud Platform (GCP)](../../clusters/gcp.md) clusters.
{% endhint %}

## Abstract

Maskinporten is a service that offers a simple API security model based on the OAuth2 protocol, and the use of JWT bearer grants. A Concept inspired by [Google's System Accounts](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/oauth2/service-account).

> Maskinporten allows API providers (external agencies) to define access to their APIs, modeled as scopes and based on the consumer's organization number.

Reviewer: Maybe swap the order of these paragraphs. Link to digdirs documentation/page? Should clearly describe the intended purposes of the service in the context of NAV (why/when do I need this?)

The NAIS platform provides support for simple declarative provisioning of an [Maskinporten client](https://difi.github.io/felleslosninger/maskinporten_auth_server-to-server-oauth2.html) with sensible defaults that your application may use to integrate with Maskinporten.

> An Maskinporten `client` allows your application to leverage Maskinporten for authentication and authorization requesting external agencies. To achieve this, your application must implement [JWT grants](https://difi.github.io/felleslosninger/maskinporten_protocol_token.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Maskinporten client allows your application to leverage Maskinporten for authentication and authorization when performing service-to-service requests to external agencies. To achieve this, your application must implement [JWT grants](https://difi.github.io/felleslosninger/maskinporten_protocol_token.html).
```

  namespace: aura
  labels:
    team: aura
spec:
  image: navikt/nais-testapp:66.0.0
  maskinporten:
    enabled: true
    scopes:
      - scope: "nav:some/scope"
```
{% endcode-tabs-item %}

### Spec

See the [NAIS manifest](../../nais-application/reference.md#spec-maskinporten).

### Access Policies

The following [outbound external hosts](../../nais-application/access-policy.md#external-services) are automatically added when enabling this feature:

- `ver2.maskinporten.no` in development
- `maskinporten.no` in production

You do not need to specify these explicitly.

### Scopes

Maskinporten allows API providers to define access to their APIs, modeled as scopes and based on the consumer's organization number.

When a `client` requests Maskinporten (Identity Provider) for a token:
- Maskinporten validates the validity of the JWT and signature ([Runtime JWK Secret](#runtime-variables-&-credentials) used to sign the JWT).  
- When `client` has access to the requested resources: `scope`, an `access_token` will be returned to the `client` and can be used for further actions.

For more details see: [Overview of flows in Digdirator](#overview-of-flows)

{% hint style="warning" %}

> Make sure **NAV** have `pre-registered` rights to **all** `scopes` specified in the manifest or provision o client will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that the relevant service providers have pre-registered **NAV** as a valid consumer of any scopes that you define. Provisioning of client will fail otherwise.
```

NAV´s `pre-registered` scopes can be found with proper access rights in [Digdir selvbetjening](https://selvbetjening-samarbeid-ver2.difi.no/auth/login).
{% endhint %}

> ### Runtime Variables & Credentials

Reviewer: Should we have a `Usage` heading at some point here? Point to the documentation at Maskinporten

| `MASKINPORTEN_SCOPES` |  The scopes registered for the client at Maskinporten as a whitepace-separated string. See [JWT grants](https://difi.github.io/felleslosninger/maskinporten_protocol_token.html) for more information. |
| `MASKINPORTEN_WELL_KNOWN_URL` | The well-known URL for the OIDC metadata discovery document for Maskinporten. |
{% endcode-tabs-item %}
{% code-tabs-item title="Example values" %}
| Name | Values |
|---|---|
| `MASKINPORTEN_CLIENT_ID` | `e89006c5-7193-4ca3-8e26-d0990d9d981f` |
| `MASKINPORTEN_SCOPES` | `nav:first/scope nav:another/scope` |
| `MASKINPORTEN_WELL_KNOWN_URL` | `https://ver2.maskinporten.no/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server` |
{% endcode-tabs-item %}
{% code-tabs-item title="Example value for MASKINPORTEN_CLIENT_JWK" %}
```json
{
  "use": "sig",
  "kty": "RSA",
  "kid": "jXDxKRE6a4jogcc4HgkDq3uVgQ0",
  "alg": "RS256",
  "n": "xQ3chFsz...",
  "e": "AQAB",
  "d": "C0BVXQFQ...",
  "p": "9TGEF_Vk...",
  "q": "zb0yTkgqO...",
  "dp": "7YcKcCtJ...",
  "dq": "sXxLHp9A...",
  "qi": "QCW5VQjO..."
}
```
{% endcode-tabs-item %}
{% endcode-tabs %}

> ### Migration guide - step by step

Reviewer: Migrating from where? Should clarify that this only applies to clients that already exist in the IaC repository.
